somebody sent me an email recently with
a link to an article that wasn't so much
complaining but just factually
describing the digital nomad scene in
Chiangmai as a scam as a pyramid scheme
specifically and saying look this is a
little world of people who quit their
jobs in Los Angeles and London and
Australia and move to Chiang Mai and the
reality is the only way they can make
money is by preying on one another that
new people show up and the old people
try to sell the books try to sell them a
dream try to sell them yoga classes but
try to sell them the illusion they can
have a wonderful new life in Chiang Mai
and economically they really can't it
was an interesting article I mean you
know I think it's tremendously important
for all of us that were honest with
ourselves and honest with others about
where our money comes from whether we're
living in Los Angeles or Chiang Mai
Thailand it's certainly easy to meet
someone and mistake them for being
financially self-reliant in Southeast
Asia when really they're not there are
certainly a lot of people who are in
Chiang Mai who are spending money that
they've inherited and I don't say that
with any hatred I don't say that with
any rancor but it's the truth and there
are other people and to give you a
specific example I met one Eastern
European woman and she was what you'd
call an absentee landlord she owned an
apartment in Eastern Europe and every
month let's say that apartment gave her
five hundred dollars in rent somebody
else was paying rent to stay in that
apartment that she owned and in a place
like Cambodia and a place like Thailand
that's a lot of money so I mean when I
met that woman this absentee landlord
she did not introduce herself to me as
an absentee landlord she didn't say to
me hi this is my name what I do for a
living is I live off the rent money of
this apartment I owe and your
no no no she introduced herself to me as
a chef and she had some term I
forget if she called herself a
macrobiotic chef or an organic chef or
something whatever some something
something fancier than just chef so I
went to meet her and I was assuming she
was gonna tell me that she's so many why
she had a degree in cuisine and a career
link to cuisine and I was really
expressing you know concern for I said
well gee you know here in this part of
Asia I don't really see how you can earn
enough money to pay your rent in that
line of work and I had known a couple of
people two men stand out in my mind
white European men who actually did work
as chefs in East Asia in restaurants and
also in hotels but in general none of
those places could pay you know Western
trained one of them was a French trained
chef a wage durably normally those
places would pay for a short period of
time for a foreign chef to come in and
educate their own staff so their staff
could learn to cook western-style
cuisine or improve their their skills so
that you get a couple weeks of work
doing training sessions and then they'd
have to move on so because it had that
experience before of talking to those
guys when I first met this woman I was
really consider oh well gee you know how
do you afford afford your rent let alone
your next airplane ticket I wondered
that's not what I said directly but that
was what was on my mind how you actually
afford your ranch I had you as your Ford
your next airplane ticket if you're
earning the same wages that a local
person would being you know working in
the back of a restaurant and she
immediately just sort of dismissed the
question and said oh well you know I
have this apartment that I own in
Eastern Europe and so every month I get
income from the rent from that apartment
so that's not really a problem for me
okay mystery solved right I mean that's
that's what it comes down to here it can
be very misleading to people I think
other people might have met her and
might have assumed that this was really
somebody who was living that dream this
was somebody was a macrobiotic chef or
whatever so know what's up
EPIK chef and indeed she could have had
a youtube channel promoting herself as
exactly that to her fans but in reality
she was at best a hobbyist she was
someone who cooked for fun or cooked in
her spare time and did not cook for a
living
she wasn't a real pro and I mean this is
part of the internet age we live in is
of amateurs misrepresenting themselves
as professionals whether it's Ted Carr
saying that he's an athlete when he's
not an athlete or someone saying they're
an artist when they're not an artist
they don't actually you know earn their
living through the arts you know across
the board we're living in an era when
it's never been easier for an amateur to
find an audience but it's never been
more difficult for an amateur to earn a
living from that audience and certainly
I mean Ted Carr himself by his own
account is a failed author being an
author let alone an editor or a book
publisher now it has never been easier
to write a book and have that book reach
its audience but it's incredibly
difficult to actually earn a living with
a pen to earn a living from writing and
that's true across the board in fiction
in nonfiction even people are writing
for newspapers now a ridiculous
percentage of the content in newspapers
the authors are not being paid for so
I'll come back to that but the general
whole reflection I want to share with
you here is that it's tremendously
important for us to be honest about
where our money comes from even if it's
just the influence we have on other
people who see us face-to-face and I saw
that many many many times in Southeast
Asia where people would say to me like
this really happened people would say to
me oh um but you can earn money I have a
good friend and he lives in a big house
he lives a wealthy Rp lifestyle and he
just writes articles for the local
newspaper so this would be like in
Thailand this would be writing for the
Bangkok Post or something or maybe
writing for the put on pan post
and no I knew enough of those people and
I knew and I said look you must realize
if you write articles for a newspaper in
Thailand or newspaper who as a foreigner
not as a locally hired person you repeat
a symbolic wage you're paid a very small
amount of money just to reward you for
your time just to make you feel welcome
just to make you feel valued but you're
not paying your rent with that you're
not buying a car with that you're not
buying a house with that and the people
they were describing whether it was
money they that they'd inherited or
money from a prior career like you know
but used to be an architect in Europe
and now they were semi-retired in
Thailand and writing for the newspaper
it's in many many cases there's this
illusion that what people have written
on their business card what people say
they do is where their money really
comes from I don't know if anyone is so
naive to believe that someone like Ted
car can afford to buy multiple airplane
tickets back and forth between Hawaii
and Canada and Thailand on the basis of
him selling motivational ebooks I doubt
it I doubt I do not know if anyone is
naive enough to believe the story he now
presents that he apparently saved up
money as a fresh fruit tycoon apparently
a black market fresh fruit tycoon in
Vancouver Canada he says that when he
was living in Vancouver he would buy 600
dollars worth of fruit and then sell it
on to his friends and clients
he would buy wholesale and he would sell
retail with a 15% markup and he remarks
that 15% on 600 dollars is pretty good
money well yes it would be if you were
selling 600 dollars of fruit a day but
that's not what he means I think he
means $600 a month
is it $600 a week Ted
I doubt it that's a lot of mangoes you
gotta have a lot of friends to move 600
toys of fruit every week and I hate to
tell you this but 15% of $600 is $90 $90
Canadian maybe real money in Cambodia
but that's not real money in the City of
Vancouver Vancouver BC Canada the cost
of rent is very very high the cost of
living is very very high and I do not
think it is credible for Ted Carr to
suggest that in just a few short years
perhaps just one year it seems like a
very short period of time he worked as a
part-time personal trainer at a
mainstream gym and he sold crates of
fruit out of his garage and it's his
garage not his parent's garage so he was
paying rent for a house in Vancouver
which is you can you can try to do the
math how many crates of mangoes would he
have to sell at a 15% markup just to pay
the rent for a house a house that has a
garage in Vancouver British Columbia
Canada that's a lot of mangoes my friend
that's a lot and yet we are supposed to
imagine that in a brief period of him
handling mangoes for his friends his
short career is a fresh fruit cut tycoon
and part-time personal fitness trainer
he saved up the money for him to now
live back and forth between Thailand
Hawaii and the west coast of Canada
that's a very expensive lifestyle I
don't care if he films himself being in
a cheap hostel or a cheap apartment he
got from Airbnb that's real money okay
and you weren't old enough to be retired
Ted I think there are a lot of other
questions to ask there there questions
about having ambition there's questions
about the fact that he he originally
said that he dropped out of university
because he wanted to be a writer now
maybe in some ways that's a noble
ambition but in fact what he says now is
that he just dropped out of university
because he wanted to enjoy his own life
and leave
the moment well that's very different
isn't it that has none of the personal
sacrifice or commitment to an art or
commitment to an audience or commitment
to accomplishing anything that may be
becoming a writer has but the bottom
line is you are really doing a
disservice to yourself and others if you
lie in this way if you pretend that you
are paying your own way in Chiang Mai
Thailand or anywhere else by selling
buckets of fruit or anything else when
you're not now you know I don't know I
don't need to speculate but I mean Ted
could it be that you inherited money
you're not mentioning could it be that
the garage you were selling fruit out of
was not your garage was your parents
garage there has to be some more
plausible explanation than that you went
from by your own account working in a
hamburger restaurant for six dollars an
hour to dropping out of college dropping
out of college paying $500 to get a
health coach certificate working as a
part-time health coach and selling fruit
of garage it does not make sense that
you graduated from this career to living
as you do now on permanent vacation back
and forth between Hawaii and Thailand by
airplane you can do the math Ted it
doesn't add up and you know I'll just
say this has really been a recurring
problem in my life people around me in
Cambodia would say oh but you can get a
job working for the local newspaper here
in Cambodia because you have this
background as an editor an author and
researcher and you have to say them know
the foreign employees they have there
some of them are paying to be there some
of them are university students a
master's student from California who is
wealthy or on some kind of scholarship
or both most likely both where in effect
the parents of the employee are paying
them to be there in Cambodia working for
free there's a lot of that going on in
the humanitarian sector it's a lot of
that going on in creative writing and
journal
we're the people who they may hand you a
business card that suggests that they're
an employee there but the reality is
they're not paying their rent by working
at that newspaper or working in that
charity they may have a very impressive
sounding job title from that part of the
nonprofit sector or creative writing
sector whatever or the media whatever it
may be but the reality is their parents
in California are still supporting them
or their university in California is
still supporting them it's actually not
a viable career for them it's not a
viable career for me and it's not a
viable career for anyone and sometimes I
think a whole sector of the economy can
get dragged down by this kind of
mismatch set of expectations where
people are selling you a dream I did I
did want to mention this in my channel
you know sooner or later and this is a
good time to to say it you know at my
university in Canada we had a woman come
to a creative writing class and she was
presented as a success story as an
author etc I mean she did learn her she
did earn her living by writing books but
when she went over the economic reality
of her career for years and years she
taught English as an ESL teacher in
English in English as a second language
teacher in Hong Kong and in southern
China and at the end of that time I mean
her youth was gone she lost the chance
to have children or have a fan-made her
family she was too old to bear kids
anymore and she went back to Canada with
nothing and she moved back into her
mom's house I was sitting there
listening this lecture and there was
more to it as I'll say in a second I was
sitting there listening this lecture and
I was like how is it possible that this
is being held up as a positive example
for university students if anything this
should be presented the universities
with the sternest warning imaginable
saying hey you might think it's all fun
and games after you finish your
university degree to go and get a
low-paying job in Asia teaching English
as a second language but guess where you
can end up when you're 45 years old now
anyone else if she had did this woman
who gave the
a university if she had stayed in Canada
and worked a minimum-wage job at Tim
Hortons it's a donut shop or at a
Starbucks Starbucks pays more than
minimum wage by the way if she worked a
steady minimum-wage job in Canada at the
end of that time she could have owned a
home maybe a very modest apartment but
she could have been making down payments
home she could have owned a car yes with
a line of credit yes it did she could
have put together a real life for
herself she could have had a future and
instead she worked in a sector where
fundamentally people are underpaid
because they loved it you know there are
so I still talk about the day I talk to
other vegans like that there are vegans
who ask me for advice because I have
background in this living and working in
Asia there are vegans who say I just
love working with kids and it's true so
they'll work for below minimum wage
below what minimum wage would be in
Canada they'll work against their own
financial interests short term and long
term and they may really destroy their
own long-term future partly because they
love kids and partly because this is a
whole sector of the economy that's
really how is it it's influenced by
young people finishing university and
wanting to go to Asia and chase a dream
and chase a dream with on the one hand
very little sense of economic realism
and the other hand with very real
financial support from their parents
right like part of it just may be that
they feel they can come to Asia and
teach ESL for a few years and go back to
Canada with nothing go back to America
go back to England go back to where they
come from but let's say it's Canada and
they have the confidence that when they
go back to Canada they'll be able to
move into their parents house again with
nothing and then find their footing find
a new job finding a career no job should
leave you in that position okay if
you're going to go work in a coal mine
for five years at the end of those five
years you should really own something
whether that's an apartment or a car or
whatever you should have a footing you
should not have to move back in to your
parents house and the whole sector of
ESL teaching on the contrary it's really
based on that pattern
of exploiting young people who have all
kinds of dreams look you can see this on
YouTube there are so many young people
in America now who grow up watching
Japanese cartoons and when they finished
the university degree in their minds
there is nothing grander than going to
Japan
the magical country that all these
cartoons come from and that's what they
want to do and certainly if you're vegan
and you've been spending any time at all
on the Internet
you're aware there are a lot of vegans
of all ages it's not just young people
because I've met people in their 50s who
did this there are people who are
university students through retirement
age who want to quit their job or drop
out of university and run away to the
magical city of chiang mai thailand
which is a rundown hellhole by the way
it's an awful City don't let me tell you
otherwise and they want to live like Ted
car they want the dream that people like
Ted Carr and durianrider are selling
them and how are you gonna bankroll that
dream is it gonna be by selling ebooks
to other people I don't think so
coal mining is a lot more honest than
this kind of pyramid scheme where one
person after another joins the digital
Nomad scene one person after another
jumps into this new life and then tries
to sell the promise of that new life to
others right and the reality is the
people who are really living those lives
either have money they saved that from
another job in the past or an
inheritance or some other arrangement
they own an apartment back in Toronto
someone else's paying rent on that
apartment and that rent would not be a
lot of money in Canada but maybe it's a
lot of money in Cambodia or Thailand
this is what goes on
[Music]
I think Asia offers a lot of people the
appealing illusion of a life of
affluence that's completely unearned and
completely undeserved and and I
understand completely that especially
when people have just finished
university or maybe they've just gotten
they just lost patience with a job to
hate that may be an especially appealing
notion that you two can live like Ted
car or that you can get into any of the
sectors I've mentioned in this video
and suddenly earn start earning a living
that I don't know will provide you with
regular access to a swimming pool in a
tropical country but it's a trap
and for me I think the saddest part of
it is that most of the people who are
laying the trap don't really profit from
it and don't really know that that's
what they're doing and that's what's
going on to give a contrasting example
that doesn't involve third-world
so-called favourable conditions or that
kind of economic disparity you know I
spent a lot of time in Cambridge England
and Oxford UK and those cities were full
of people who would cling to a Cambridge
mailing address clinging to an Oxford
mailing address sometimes with no job at
all or with a job on paper that they
could put on their put on their business
card to say hey officially I'm a
researcher of this institute but the job
either paid absolutely nothing or paid
an honorarium paid a merely symbolic sum
of money right and it was in England in
British culture it was very very
difficult to get those people to be
honest with you because they would meet
you and they would say oh I'm a
researcher at the McKenzie foundation
for anthropological Oh something really
specific okay
for the anthropology of the human diet
some of this or the diet of remote
tribal groups I'm a researcher for this
foundation for endangered languages
something that sounds exciting and
interesting and the reality was that
these were people who very often had a
PhD sometimes they were they had an MA
and they were waiting they were hoping
to do a PhD these were people who were
really living they would be living in
absolute poverty they would be on the
dole they would be doing they would be
worse than unemployed but maybe they had
some savings from a job that in the past
maybe they had an inheritance maybe they
had parents who still supported them
financially and that was supporting them
in living on the cusp of a very wealthy
academic institution and to still be in
the loop to find out about what kind of
research projects they could apply to
get involved in you know what grants
what proposals maybe someone was putting
together a non-profit project and they
could join or they could at least submit
their resume submit their CV just by
living there just by being in the loop
it's a bit like being an unemployed
actor and yet wanting to live in
Hollywood and be connected to people had
those social connection so you know what
opportunities are missing out on at
least there was a whole world of people
there in you know in England and in
Cambridge and Oxford and I mean I think
it was just from their own sense of
pride that they did not want to be
honest about how they were paying the
rent but at the same time all these
people coming together in one place at
one time everyone coming together and
for their own reasons being dishonest
about it it actually creates a kind of
trap for people on the outside looking
in because people on the outside looking
and really think oh hey if I do this if
I do the same thing he does I can afford
to pay my rent and live in a nice home
in Oxford or a nice home in Cambridge I
can also write books and write research
grant proposals and you know I can live
the same life I see other people living
because that's what you see you see them
living you see their business card you
hear their boasting
you know
I mean and and it's a trap it's a trap
even if nobody is intentionally lighting
the trap you know what I mean and I see
that same thing here with you know the
wonder that is Chiang Mai with all these
people really lying one way or another
about what the economic opportunities
aren't Chiang Mai and what the economic
costs are of quitting your job even if
you literally just have a job at
Starbucks and going to teach English as
a Second Language in Chiang Mai or going
and trying to earn a living on YouTube
in Chiang Mai which is kind of even more
ridiculous the everyone is presenting
this illusion of of affluence but on the
other hand they're also just presenting
that most fundamental illusion that the
job you see on their business card is
the job that actually pays their rent